Can I ask you first, as an
Arab, as a Palestinian,
as a human being, a mother.
How are you feeling?
Ever since October 7th,
Well, look, Christian,
I cannot begin
to describe to you
the depth of the grief, the pain
and the the shock
that we are feeling here in Jord
All of us are united in this gri
regardless of our origin.
We are just.
Just can't believe the images
that we're seeing every single d
coming out of us.
We're going to bed
seeing those images and waking u
you know,
I don't know how to you know,
as a mom, we've seen Palestinian
who have had
to write the names
of their children on their hands
because the chances of them bein
to death of their bodies
turning into corpses are so high
I just want to remind the world
that Palestinian mothers
love their children
just as much as any other mother
in the world.
And for them to have to go throu
this is just unbelievable.
And equally,
I think the people all around
the middle East, including in Jo
we are just shocked and disappoi
by the world's reaction
to this catastrophe that is unfo
in the last couple of weeks.
We have seen
a glaring double standard in the
When October 7th happened, the w
immediately and unequivocally
stood by Israel
and its right
to defend itself and condemned
the attacks that happened.
But when we look
we're seeing the last couple of
we have we're seeing silence in
Countries have stopped at just e
concern or acknowledging the cas
But always with a preface of dec
of support for Israel.
And are we being told that it is
to kill a family, an entire fami
at gunpoint,
but it's okay to shell them to d
I mean, there is a
glaring double standard here,
and it's it's
just shocking to the Arab world.
This is the first time in modern
that there is such human sufferi
and the world is not even
calling for a fire.
So the silence is deafening.
And to many in our region,
it makes the Western world compl
you know,
through their support
and through the cover
that they give Israel, that it i
its threat to defend itself.
Many in the Arab world
are looking at the Western world
as not just tolerating this,
but as aiding and abetting it.
And this is just horrendous.
And it's deeply deeply disappoin
to all of us.
Queen Rania,
I'm going to ask
you more about this
and go deeper into this, you kno
into your feelings about this.
But first, I want to ask you,
you know,
the Israelis are shocked to thei
the grief, the the the the you k
what happened to them
has never happened in that way
since the Holocaust.
And they are shaken to their cor
as I said, and the grief.
I just want to get
from you what you felt on Octobe
Well, of course, I was shocked.
And, you know,
Jordan has made its position ver
We condemn the killing of any ci
whether Palestinian
or is really that is Jordan's
ethical and moral position.
And it's also the position of Is
Islam condemns
the killing of civilians
as my husband mentioned recently
the pact of all my which was iss
in the case of Jerusalem
15 centuries ago,
that's 1000 years
before the Geneva Conventions
orders Muslims not to hurt a not
a woman, child or elderly
and to be the person
and not to destroy a tree
or hurt a priest.
And so this is what we believe
are the rules of engagement
at a time of war.
But they need to apply to everyb
So yes, there was the shock
and there is the condemnation.
But why isn't there equal condem
to what is happening now?
I just want to emphasize that
what happened on
this conflict
did not begin on October 7th,
although it has been being portr
as that.
You know,
most networks are covering the s
under the title of Israel at War
But for many Palestinians
on the other side of the separat
and the other side of the barbed
war has never left.
This is a 75 year old story
a story of overwhelming death
and displacement
to the Palestinian people.
It is a story of an occupation
under apartheid
regime that that occupies land,
that demolishes houses, confisca
military incursions, night raids
You know, the context of a nucle
regional superpower
that occupies, oppresses
and commits
daily documented crimes
against Palestinians
is missing from the narrative.
Queen Rania,
you know,
for too long, Palestinians live.
I'm sorry to interrupt. You.
I want to ask you a specific que
because you're using a lot of wo
which clearly many in your you k
in the Arab world
have used words like apartheid.
And the rest.
But you know,
that you are going to come
under a lot of criticism
from Israel and its supporters.
And I'm wondering
whether you're coming out to spe
Let me just
I know size,
but let me just emphasize that
that apartheid is a designation
that was given not by Arabs,
but by Israeli
and international human
rights organizations.
You wrote in an Instagram story
just in the last week.
It isn't self-defense.
If you are an occupying force
and you show the destruction of
And you have posted a video of y
from a presser in 2009 during th
saying it is heartbreaking
to see how little has changed
the world cannot remain silent.
This this has to stop.
Do you
feel that you have a particular
you know, as queen of Jordan
in a country
that has a peace treaty with Isr
to speak up
It's not about me.
It's about speaking up for human
You know,
this is not about
being pro-Israeli or pro Palesti
This is about choosing the peopl
the everyday people on both side
And, you know, and explaining ag
that the Palestinian people
have for too long
been living under oppression
and the dehumanization.
You know,
they suffer daily indignities
and human rights violations
where they're
being jailed or humiliated or ha
They do not have freedom of move
There are over 500 checkpoints
scattered all over the West Bank
You have a separation
wall, which is deemed illegal
by the International Courts of J
that has
separated the territories
into 200 disconnected enclaves.
And, you know,
you've seen the aggressive expan
of settlements on Palestinian la
and those have interrupted
the territorial conviction
integrity of the territories
and has deemed
an autonomous,
independent Palestinian state no
So you are seeing all these
this is the background of this c
There's a hyper fixation on Hama
now because of
that happened the last couple of
But this is a problem
that far precedes Hamas
and will continue after Hamas.
This is a fight for freedom
and for justice,
and that is what needs to be hea
Can I ask you this question
then, because, you know, quite a
I think she's Saudi anyway.
A journalist on the Saudi
television network Al-Arabiya
took this
and hammered Khalid
Meshaal, the former head of Hama
and said to him, the butchery,
that's my word.
But she said what
everybody seen on their screens
you know,
turned the world away
from the Palestine cause
and just to expand.
People are saying Hamas and what
Has brought this down
on these poor people of Gaza.
Do you accept that
Well, I believe I do
not believe
and as I said, the killing of ci
But this is a story of violence
that has been going on now for s
And this violence needs to be co
But at the end of the day,
what we're seeing today
and what people need to understa
is that, yes, you know, under th
of of the right to defend itself
we are witnessing atrocities.
You know,
every country has a right
to defend itself,
but not through any means,
not through war crimes,
not through collective punishmen
You know,
6000 people, civilians killed so
2400 children.
How is that self-defense?
We are seeing butchery
at a mass scale using precision
precision weapons.
You know,
so for the past two weeks, we ha
the the indiscriminate bombardme
of Gaza,
entire families wiped out
residential neighborhoods
flattened to the ground,
the targeting of hospitals
and schools and churches and and
and medical workers
journalists and aid workers.
How is that self-defense?
You know,
why is why is it that whenever
Israel commits
these atrocities,
it comes under
the banner of self-defense?
But when there's a
violence by Palestinians,
it is immediately
called terrorism?
Is the word terrorist.
It's just reserved
for exclusively for Muslims and
Well, let me ask
there's a real double standard h
You're seeing your husband
being of all symmetry that we se
Mm hmm.
Well, let me ask you this.
Your husband, King Abdullah, act
because these are not two equal
people in the conflict.
You know,
one is an occupier
and one is the occupied.
One has a military,
one of the mightiest in the worl
and the other doesn't
have a military at all.
So there is a false symmetry her
that is being drawn.
And there's also
when you say the rights to defen
that does not say the entire sto
it doesn't say the story of the
of international law,
international humanitarian law.
It doesn't tell you the sufferin
and the end, the story of the oc
You know, Israel is in
violation of no less
than 30 UN
security resolutions
that require it's an IT alone to
withdraw from territories
occupied in 1967 to stop the set
the separation
wall, the human rights violation
This is at the crux of this issu
It is not this hyper fixation on